I have been recommending students bring their own laptops to 2 classes that I teach BIOL 3295 and MATH 4190 for several years. This practice began when I started teaching BIOL 3295 with an enrollment of 30 students, and the largest computer lab available to the biology department housing only 20 computers. While students could share a computer, this wasn't practical as the room would not be able to fit the chairs needed for 30 students. To solve this problem, I invited students to bring their own laptops, and booked an adjacent meeting room. The space was cramped but the students made it work. I have subsequently realized that there is another computer lab available (with 16 computers) and I now book both of biology's computer labs and the meeting room for 3 hours every week when we have lab. Another problem arises in that I am not the only instructor seeking to use these computer labs. I have conflicts with two other courses that seek to use the computer lab each for 1 week during the afternoon. Currently, I arrange my lab schedule around these conflicts, but our intention in biology is to introduce more computer use into our ciriculuum and it seems that if we do so, we may exceed our available computing resources. In MATH 4190, I have offered students to work on their own laptops, but they instead usually elect to work on the computers in the computer lab (~80%), possibly because it is easier not to carry a laptop around all day, and because the students have used these computers in prior class work. The situation in MATH 4190 contrasts BIOL 3295 because computers are more easily available for MATH 4190, while in BIOL 3295, I have needed students to bring their own computers due to resource constraints. A significant challenge in having students bring their own laptops is booking a space, as biology labs are 3 hours. As you might imagine, no classrooms are empty for 3 consecutive hours such that we could move into them. In fact, the available spaces are biology's labs and computer labs.   

To maintain an equitable learning environment, students should not be disadvantaged if they do not have their own laptops. In a Fall 2019 class of 30 students, 2 students have not been able to bring a laptop. In addition, 2 other students had problems with their computers breaking during the semester and needed to use university resources temporarily. I have been at a graduate student committee meeting where the graduate student was using their own personal laptop and it was not working sufficiently well. These situations suggest requiring laptops for undergraduates is not accessible for everyone and would be unfair. An instructor for a BIOL 2000- lab reported that 5% of students are not able to bring their own laptop a lab which offers this as an option.

For those students that would like to use their own laptops, I believe this can be valuable. If a student has installed software on their own computer they can more easily return to advanced studies using that software, for example, a biology student that uses R in a class can more easily start using it for their honours thesis if they have the software installed on their computer. In addition, one challenge we have every semester is finding paths to upload data we have downloaded into R. This can be very system specific, and I think it helps the students to have confidence that in a new setting (i.e. their honours), they should be able to get the data upload working on their own laptop. We have allowed students to bring their laptops to class and have solved a wide variety of platform- and software-specific software installation issues that are well beyond our expertise, and we do this because we are trying to help the students as much as we can, even though we risk criticism if we are unable to solve these problems. In addition, students have expressed frustration with the computer support services currently available on campus.

- Instructors cannot recommend that two students share a computer that is the property of one student. 
- Drinks are not permitted around computers, and if a computer is damaged during a class, the instructor and the univeristy are not liable. 
- Instructors cannot require computer use in classes unless all students that wish to use a university-sourced computer have one made available to them.
- Spaces intended for personal laptop computer use will need to have sufficient electrical outlets.
