Working with Ed Whalen, we propose the following changes for BIOL 1001 in Fall 2020:

1. Data are to be archived in electronic format, submitted to brightspace, and the lab report contains a sentence explaining where the data are archived.

1. All graphs are made electronically. We will provide support for how to make the graphs in R. In year 1, of implementing these changes we will allow graphs made in other softwares. Depending on the success, in subsequent years we will require graphs made in R.

1. Hypothesis are to be written as equations.

1. Revisions to the lab manual.

Depending on the success of these changes, in year 2 we hope to shift to a better data archiving format, i.e., one that is publically avialable with a url, i.e. a biology department gitlab.

### Revise lab manual text to give an updated description of what biologists do
The lab manual needs to be edited to communicate current practices for researchers. Particularly, in Appendix II, beginning on p118, comments around 'The Scientific Method', 'How Researchers communicate their findings', and 'Graphs and Tables' need to be revised. In addition, the roles of statistics in biology and modelling as an approach to doing science needs to be communicated. The role of traditional ecological knowledge and non-western approaches should be mentioned. Basic terminology around statistics and data science should be introduced.

### Tables
Data archiving standards for professional biologists have now moved beyond writing results in a notebook, and we need to give the students exposure to these expectations. These expectations should be a streamlined version of Week 1 https://datacarpentry.org/semester-biology/schedule/ and Emilie and Danielle may also have relevant materials. Specifically, Q.2 of the assignment for week 1 https://datacarpentry.org/semester-biology/assignments/sql-data/ reflects similar expectations as to what we should have for first year biology. We might also discuss what is metadata and Ecological Metadata Language (https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.01276). 

### Data archiving 
After year 1, we may ask first year students to electronically submit their data to a github/gitlab repository. We would require the students to consent to having their data be publically availabile and anonymize. This would also require that the students create a free github/gitlab account, which may be problematic for the university.  We would need to provide training/documentation for lab instructors and TAs on github, both for help the students to submit their data, but also on merging the pull requests from the submitted data.

### Graphs
Similarly, professional biologists have moved beyond making graphs using pencil and paper. Perhaps we could accept graphs made in a variety of softwares, while also have developed resources for R, RStudio, and ggplot, so this is an option. Again, this should be a streamlined version of Week 5 from https://datacarpentry.org/semester-biology/schedule/, but may require some time as plotting requires some preliminary comments on built-in functions, loading packages, getting help, common errors, reading in data, etc. Expectations around figure captions in the biology lab manual could be revised. 

### Statistics
_AH: These are some very specific suggestions that we need to integrate into https://github.com/ahurford/quantitative-training-resources/blob/master/Documents%20in%20progress/Draft%20Quantitative%20Learning%20Goals.pdf and eventually remove from here_

Having not yet required STAT 2550, BIOL 1001/1002 is not the place to start in on statistics, but it is the place to better prepare students for (1) the importance of statistics in biology; and (2) key concepts in statistics.

(1) will be addressed by revisions to the lab manual.

Regarding (2), (and these recommendations are made primarily from my conversations with Dave Schneider):

1. Currently, first year students are taught to write a hypothesis and a prediction. We need to add: sketch a graph of the results if your hypothesis was supported; draw a graph if your hypothesis is not supported; and write the equations that correspond to each of your graphs. To teach this we need to say, 'if you think _y_ increases with _x_, but you're not quite sure exactly how, the default assumption, given that _x_ is a continous variable, is that there is a linear relationship, _y=mx+c_. In writing the equations, students get to choose their notation. This is powerful, because biology involves a lot of non-conventional notation, for example, dN/dt = r N (exponential growth), if dN/dt is plotted on the y-axis, and N is plotted on the x-axis, is a straight line with a zero y-intercept and a slope of r, but the notation is a barrier because it isn't in the form _y = mx_.

2. We need to expect that some indication of spread is reported, i.e. error bars on bar plots where the error bars represent the range (i.e. from the min to the max observation) and the figure caption is required to specify what the error bars show.

### Edits on the lab manual.
The lab manual is available as a .docx. Please contact Amy if you would like to contribute to editing.

'Laboratory 1 - Observational skills and Introduction to Labs. We will add 'Install R' and 'RStudio' + <0.5 hrs.

'Laboratory X' - Quantitative skills I. 2 hrs. We will take some data from the Campbell biology textbook quant exercises and get the students to practice entering the data and graphing it. Also, writing hypotheses as equations and representing error.

'Laboratory 3 - Diffusion and Osmosis' (currently, hypothesis, table, required). Add hypothesis as an equation, e-graph and a sentence describing where the e-data are archived. +0.5hrs

'Laboratory 7 - Photosynthesis' (currently, hypothesis, table, graph required). As for Laboratory 3. +0.5 hrs.

One existing lab to be removed to accomodate Lab X, to be decided by lab instructors.

### To do

- Make example solutions for the new components of Labs 3 and 7, i.e., make .csv, write the R code to make the graph in ggplot, write the hypothesis as an equation.

- Make the new Lab X. Begin by identifying appropriate data from the textbook to digitize. Digitize as a .csv and write the R code using ggplot to make the graph. Consider showing error bars. Import the data using the RStudio button.

- Dave Schneider has some material about how to write hypothesis as equations, I think we should adapt some of these exercises into Lab X.

- There is another github that is dedicated to editing the hardcopy lab manual. Lab X will be a new virtual lab, but other changes will be made by editing the hardcopy lab manual. Please contact Amy if interested.
